---
layout:     post
title:      CAS 5.1.0 RC1 Release
summary:    ...in which I present an overview of CAS 5.1.0 RC1 release.
---

<div class="alert alert-danger">
  <a href="#" class="close" data-dismiss="alert" aria-label="close">&times;</a>
  <strong>WATCH OUT!</strong><br/>This post is not official yet and may be heavily edited as development makes progress. Watch for further updates.
</div>

The official CAS 5 GA release [did happen about two and a half months ago](https://github.com/apereo/cas/releases/tag/v5.0.0). Since then,
the project has been moving forward with development of the next minor release
that is tagged as `5.1.0`. This post intends to highlight some of the improvements
and enhancements packed into the first release candidate in the `5.1.0` series.

The in-development documentation of CAS `5.1.0` is [available here](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/).

## Database AuthN BCrypt Encoder

Thanks to community contributions, minor changes made to the internal CAS authentication API to ensure
password encoding can execute correctly specially when the `BCrypt` encoder is defined.

## Duration as Unit of Measure

Thanks to community contributions, all CAS settings that deal with time units
should start to support the duration syntax for full clarity on unit of measure:

```bash
"PT20S"     -- parses as "20 seconds"
"PT15M"     -- parses as "15 minutes"
"PT10H"     -- parses as "10 hours"
"P2D"       -- parses as "2 days"
"P2DT3H4M"  -- parses as "2 days, 3 hours and 4 minutes"
```

## Events in Audit Log

CAS events are now routed to the CAS audit logs. This allows one,
for instance, to learn when an MFA event is triggered and to note
if MFA was successfully honored and executed.

## Multiple Duo Security Configurations *<sup>[1]</sup>*

CAS is now able to support different configuration blocks
for various Duo Security instances:

```properties
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[0].duoSecretKey=
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[0].duoApplicationKey=
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[0].duoIntegrationKey=
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[0].duoApiHost=
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[0].id=mfa-duo
...
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[1].duoSecretKey=
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[1].duoApplicationKey=
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[1].duoIntegrationKey=
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[1].duoApiHost=
# cas.authn.mfa.duo[1].id=mfa-second-duo
...
```

By default, a Duo Security provider in CAS is registered under `mfa-duo`
noted by the above id. However, additional providers can now be registered
with arbitrary identifiers. All MFA triggers shall function exactly as before
and as long as they are configured to produce the right match for the right
provider id, CAS will activate MFA for the Duo Security configuration
that is linked to the selected identifier.

At this point in time, Duo Security is the only provider in CAS
whose configuration can be specified in blocks. However,
[and this turned out to be a VERY non-trivial task], adjustments are made
internally to ensure other providers can be configured in much the same way
should there be demands.

## Embedded Container Version

The embedded container version now shows up in the CAS banner on startup:

```bash
CAS Version: 5.1.0-SNAPSHOT
...
Container Version: Apache Tomcat/8.5.6
```

## Registered Service Definitions Compatibility

Thanks to community contributions, CAS' handling of service registry definitions
that are backed by YAML or JSON or now slightly improved to preserve backwards compatibility
with prior CAS versions whose service definition was based on the old `org.jasig` namespace.

## Multiple Attribute Repositories *<sup>[1]</sup>*

Attribute repository sources that are controlled and managed via Person Directory
have now turned into lists. This allows you to create more than one source
if necessary and then have all sources be merged into a single repository
automatically to resolve CAS principals and attributes.

```properties
# cas.authn.attributeRepository.ldap[0].ldapUrl=ldaps://ldap1.example.edu,...
...
# cas.authn.attributeRepository.ldap[1].ldapUrl=ldaps://ldap2.example.edu,...
...
```

## Attribute Repositories Order

You have to consider that when you have more than one attribute repository source
defined, there may be cases where two sources end up colliding as they both may produce
the same attribute. In such cases, CAS already provides capabilities to merge the final
result and take action to either add, replace or ignore subsequent attempts at producing
an attribute, if one already is found and fixed. This becomes important as it directly impacts
the execution order of sources.

For instance, consider that you have sources `S1` and `S2` defined both of which
are configured to produce an attribute `A1`. Policies are configured to note that if `A1`
is already found via one source, no other source should attempt to overwrite it.
The questions then really become: which source should execute and query for data first?

To handle this, CAS allows you to order attribute repositories.
Those with a higher order execute first and take higher priority in querying
for attributes:

```properties
# cas.authn.attributeRepository.ldap[0].ldapUrl=ldaps://ldap1.example.edu,...
# cas.authn.attributeRepository.ldap[0].order=0
...
# cas.authn.attributeRepository.ldap[1].ldapUrl=ldaps://ldap2.example.edu,...
# cas.authn.attributeRepository.ldap[1].order=10
...
```

## SAML IdP Metadata Location URI

A trivial bug fix; the location of the metadata for CAS' SAML2 IdP functionality
can now be specified in URI format as well. (i.e. `file://etc/cas/somewhere`)

## Service Registry JSON Auto-Init

Service registries can now take advantage of the auto-initialization feature
in a more direct manner. The previous behavior only populated a given registry
if it was left empty by the adopter. In certain cases CAS modules auto-insert
service definitions into the registry and interfered with the auto-initialization
behavior

## Embedded Container HTTP2 Support

The embedded container is now configured to automatically upgrade the protocol
and support HTTP2.

## Internet2 Grouper MFA Trigger

As an extra option, CAS now integrate with [Grouper](http://www.internet2.edu/grouper/software.html) and use a subject group's to learn whether MFA should be triggered. As an example, you could devise a use case
where all subjects who are assigned to a `mfa-duo` groups may be asked to execute MFA
via Duo Security. If you have deployed Grouper, this may be a much more immediate option
than to pick up changes based on a given principal attribute once provisioning
has had a chance to process.

## REST API Performance

Thanks to community contributions, efforts have gone into the implementation of
CAS REST APIs to ensure best coding practices are in-place, performance-wise.

## LDAP Validator Configuration

Additional properties are now exposed to allow configuration of LDAP validators
for ALL operations that deal with LDAP functionality. CAS supports
both `SEARCH` and `COMPARE` modes.

## Logging Panel

CAS provides an administrative screen to manage and review logs.
This screen is now improved to allow one to update logger levels immediately
from the UI and observe better CAS diagnostics data.

Note that at present, changes applied to the configuration UI are only
persisted in memory, since the underlying framework does not yet provide a
way to save changes back out to disk, etc. This means, once you restart the
CAS server node all changes applied to logs via the configuration panel are lost.

## Improved Hazelcast Configuration

Minor adjustments are made to the Hazelcast configuration
to stop using deprecated settings for internal eviction policies.

## JSON Enhancements to CAS APIs

Thanks to community contributions, CAS APIs are now slightly massaged
to handle JSON serialization of core ticketing components. This is useful
for ticket registry implementations that are based on NoSQL databases such as
Apache Cassandra, which as a [pending pull request](https://github.com/apereo/cas/pull/2111)
may also soon become first-class CAS feature.

## Configuration Panel UI

TBD

## OIDC Delegated AuthN Scope

TBD

## LinkedIn Delegated AuthN

TBD

## Delegated AuthN Auto Redirect

In the event that you have configured CAS to delegate authentication to
an external [social] identity provider, options are now made available to
automatically redirect the authentication flow to the provider bypassing
the CAS login screen. This options today is only relevant and active
if there is a single provider available.

## Library Upgrades

- Spring
- Spring Boot
- Spring Cloud
- Spring Security
- Thymeleaf
- Commons Lang
- Guava
- Pac4J
- FindBugs
- Checkstyle
- Joda Time
- Couchbase
- Hibernate
- MySQL, MaridaDb and PostgreSQL Drivers
- Kryo

## What's Next?

The development team is working to make sure the CAS `5.1.0` release is on [schedule](https://github.com/apereo/cas/milestones). Additional release candidates
and more updates will likely be released prior to the official GA release.

## Get Involved

- Start your CAS deployment today. Try out features and [share feedback](https://apereo.github.io/cas/Mailing-Lists.html).
- Better yet, [contribute patches](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Contributor-Guidelines.html).
- Review and suggest documentation improvements.
- Review the release schedule and make sure you report your desired feature requests on the project's issue tracker.

## Das Ende

A big hearty thanks to all who participated in the development of this release to submit patches, report issues and suggest improvements. Keep'em coming!

[Misagh Moayyed](https://twitter.com/misagh84)

* [1] This is a breaking configuration change. Please consult the [CAS docs](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/) to learn more. *
