---
layout:     post
title:      CAS 6.1.0 RC4 Feature Release
summary:    ...in which I present an overview of CAS 6.1.0 RC4 release.
tags:       [CAS, Releases]
---

<div class="alert alert-danger">
  <strong>WATCH OUT!</strong><br/>This post is not official yet and may be heavily edited as CAS development makes progress. <a href="https://apereo.github.io/feed.xml">Watch</a> for further updates.
</div>

<div class="alert alert-success">
  <strong>Collaborate</strong><br/>The blog is managed and hosted on GitHub. If you wish to update the contents of this post or if you have found an inaccuracy and wish to make corrections, we recommend that you please submit a pull request to <a href="https://github.com/apereo/apereo.github.io">this repository</a>.
</div>

The official CAS `6.0.0` GA was released on [December 28th, 2018](https://github.com/apereo/cas/releases/tag/v6.0.0). Since then, the project has been moving forward with the development of the next feature release that is tagged as `6.1.0`. Please review the [release policy](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Release-Policy.html) to learn more about the scope of the release. This post intends to highlight some of the improvements and enhancements packed into the **fourth** release candidate in the `6.1.0` series.

You can read about the previous release candidate [here](https://apereo.github.io/2019/04/29/610rc3-release/).

* A markdown unordered list which will be replaced with the ToC
{:toc}

## Get Involved

- Start your CAS deployment today. Try out features and [share feedback](https://apereo.github.io/cas/Mailing-Lists.html).
- Better yet, [contribute patches](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Contributor-Guidelines.html).
- Suggest and apply documentation improvements.

### Shake Well Before Use

We strongly recommend that you take advantage of the release candidates as they come out. Waiting for a `GA` release is only going to set you up for unpleasant surprises. A `GA` is simply [a tag and nothing more](https://apereo.github.io/2017/03/08/the-myth-of-ga-rel/). Note that CAS releases are *strictly* time-based releases; they are not scheduled or based on specific benchmarks, statistics or completion of features. To gain confidence in a particular release, it is strongly recommended that you start early by experimenting with release candidates and/or follow-up snapshots.

In order to start experimenting with release candidates, at any given time, you should be able to append `-SNAPSHOT` to the CAS version specified in order to take advantage of snapshot builds as changes are made and published.

## Resources

- [Documentation](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/)
- [Release Schedule](https://github.com/apereo/cas/milestones)
- [Release Policy](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Release-Policy.html)

## Overlay

In the `gradle.properties` of [the overlay](https://github.com/apereo/cas-overlay-template), adjust the following setting:

```properties
casVersion=6.1.0-RC4
```

<div class="alert alert-info">
  <strong>System Requirements</strong><br/>There are no changes to the minimum system/platform requirements for this release.
</div>


## New & Noteworthy

### Required Services for Single SignOn

CAS may be configured to require the user to authenticate from an application before
access can be granted to all other registered services. [See this](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/installation/Configuring-SSO-Session-Cookie.html) for more info.

### Acceptable Usage Policy Audits

Acceptable Usage Policy choices and results are now passed to the [Audit Log](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/installation/Audits.html).

### Jasypt Configuration Security

<div class="alert alert-warning">
  <strong>WATCH OUT!</strong><br/>This is a breaking change. You will need to make sure relevant
  configuration values are updated to remain functional.
</div>

Configuration properties secured and encrypted via Jasypt are required to be prefixed with
`{cas-cipher}` instead of `{cipher}` so as to avoid conflicts with Spring Cloud way of encrypting
and decrypting values.

### Multifactor Provider Selection

In the event that more than [multifactor authentication provider](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/mfa/Configuring-Multifactor-Authentication.html) qualifies to satisfy the authentication request, CAS may be configured to present a choice and menu to the user 
where one would interactively pick the provider that works best at a given time. This mode is off by default, and complements existing
selection strategies that are based on ranking strategies and weights or custom logic implemented in Groovy scripts, etc.

### Jasypt Encryption with CAS Commandline Shell

A new `decrypt-value` command is added to [CAS Commandline Shell](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/installation/Configuring-Commandline-Shell.html) to verify encrypted values.

### SAML2 Skew Allowance per Service

SAML2 registered services can now define a `skew-allowance` value in seconds used to skew dates in the final response, such as valid-from, issue-instant, etc.

### Registered Services Actuator Endpoint

The `registeredServices` actuator endpoint gains a `DELETE` operation to remove registered services from CAS.

### Acceptto Multifactor Integration

[Acceptto](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/mfa/Acceptto-Authentication.html) is now supported
as a CAS multifactor authentication provider. The integration adds support for both multifactor authentication
and QR login codes.

### Java 12 Compatibility

Though not required, CAS is able to build and run successfully against the latest versions of JDK 12.

### Graal Compiler Compatibility

Additional tests are carried out to ensure CAS can remain functional while running with the Graal Compiler.
If you'd like to experiment with this to gain possible performance improvements, start your CAS deployment with
the following VM options:

- `-XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions`
- `-XX:+EnableJVMCI`
- `-XX:+UseJVMCICompiler`

### Dependency Updates via Renovate

The process of updating CAS dependencies is somewhat automated through Travis CI, taking advantage
of the [renovate bot](https://github.com/renovatebot).

### SAML2 Encryption Configuration per Service

CAS, running as a [SAML2 identity provider](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/installation/Configuring-SAML2-Authentication.html#name-id-selection), gains a few extra settings to control and override the encryption configuration of objects on a per service provider. Services can also be tagged to consider encryption as optional in case compatible keys are not found in the service provider metadata.

### OpenID Connect Dynamic Registration

Many incremental improvements to support OpenID Connect dynamic registration of RPs with richer metadata
in the registration request, such as handling of `policy_uri`, `tos_uri`, `logo_uri`, etc.

### Access Strategy for Delegated Authentication

The access strategy for delegated authentication events can now enforce the collection of allowed providers even in the presence of an existing
single signon session. The strategy also gains an *exclusive* mode to limit the authentication methods to only those providers allowed.

### SAML2 Signing Configuration per Service

CAS, running as a [SAML2 identity provider](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/installation/Configuring-SAML2-Authentication.html#name-id-selection), gains a few extra settings to control and override the signing configuration of objects on a per service provider. Additional documentation improvements are also
available in this space to provide more examples for signing configuration, name id selection, etc.

### OpenID Connect UserInfo Response Signing & Encryption

User profiles produced by CAS as an OpenID Connect Provider can now optionally be signed and/or encrypted on a per-relying party basis. This capability may also be defined during dynamic registration of a relying party.

### OAuth Token Expiration Policy

The expiration policy of OAuth tokens (code, access token, etc) can now conditionally be defined on a per relying-party basis,
when CAS is running as an [OAuth identity provider](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/installation/OAuth-OpenId-Authentication.html).

### Redis Authentication Throttling

Audit logs could certainly be stored in Redis databases; in this release candidate, the same database could also be used
for [throttling authentication attempts](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/installation/Configuring-Authentication-Throttling.html).

### OpenID Connect Discovery Response

The OpenID Connect Discovery Response is beefed up a bit to outline all supported modes and values when it comes to signing
and encryption of tokens, as well as handling and management of subject types, display values, etc.

### CAS Docker Deployments

In addition to the `jib` plugin built into the CAS overlay to produce docker images, 
the overlay project now also presents a `Dockerfile` with some additional notes to build a CAS image
via native Docker tooling. The build script is optimized slightly to take advantage of multi-stage builds
and leaner `alpine` base images. The [CAS Docker repository](https://github.com/apereo/cas-webapp-docker) 
is now deprecated and archived

## Other Stuff

- Assigning identifiers to registered services is modified to not produce negative numeric ids.
- Password policy warning messages should now be recognized by Memcached and the Kryo serialization engine.
- Trivial fix to CAS commandline shell ensure the runtime can recognize CAS configuration settings internally. 
- Hazelcast integrations with CAS can now be connected to the Hazelcast management center via additional settings.
- The Google Analytics cookie gains an extra setting to filter out attributes values before they are put into the cookie.

## Library Upgrades

- OpenSAML
- JavaParser
- Oshi
- Spring
- MongoDb Driver
- Ribbon
- Spring Boot
- Lombok
- Spring Data
- Apache Tomcat
- Jetty
- Twilio
- Groovy
- Jackson
- Spring Data MongoDb

## Credits

Big thanks to all who participate in the development of this release to submit patches and contribute improvements. Keep'em coming!

[Misagh Moayyed](https://twitter.com/misagh84)
