---
layout:     post
title:      CAS 6.3.0 RC1 Feature Release
summary:    ...in which I present an overview of CAS 6.3.0 RC1 release.
tags:       [CAS, Releases]
---

<div class="alert alert-danger">
  <strong>WATCH OUT!</strong><br/>This post is not official yet and may be heavily edited as CAS development makes progress. <a href="https://apereo.github.io/feed.xml">Watch</a> for further updates.
</div>

<div class="alert alert-success">
  <strong>Collaborate</strong><br/>The blog is managed and hosted on GitHub. If you wish to update the contents of this post or if you have found an inaccuracy and wish to make corrections, we recommend that you please submit a pull request to <a href="https://github.com/apereo/apereo.github.io">this repository</a>.
</div>

The official CAS `6.2.0` GA was released in [June 2020](https://github.com/apereo/cas/releases). Since then, the project has been moving forward with the development of the next feature release that is tagged as `6.3.0`. Please review the [release policy](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Release-Policy.html) to learn more about the scope of the release. This post intends to highlight some of the improvements and enhancements packed into the **first** release candidate in the `6.3.0` series.

<!-- If you are looking for additional info on the previous release candidate, [please see this post](https://apereo.github.io/2020/04/17/620rc4-release/). -->

* A markdown unordered list which will be replaced with the ToC
{:toc}

## Apereo Membership

If you benefit from Apereo CAS as free and open-source software, we invite you to [join the Apereo Foundation](https://www.apereo.org/content/apereo-membership) and financially support the project at a capacity that best suits your deployment. Note that all development activity is performed *almost exclusively* on a voluntary basis with no expectations, commitments or strings attached. Having the financial means to better sustain engineering activities will allow the developer community to allocate *dedicated and committed* time for long-term support, maintenance and release planning, especially when it comes to addressing critical and security issues in a timely manner. Funding will ensure support for the software you rely on and you gain an advantage and say in the way Apereo, and the CAS project at that, runs and operates. If you consider your CAS deployment to be a critical part of the identity and access management ecosystem, this is a viable option to consider.

## Get Involved

- Start your CAS deployment today. Try out features and [share feedback](https://apereo.github.io/cas/Mailing-Lists.html).
- Better yet, [contribute patches](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Contributor-Guidelines.html).
- Suggest and apply documentation improvements.

### Shake Well Before Use

We strongly recommend that you take advantage of the release candidates as they come out. Waiting for a `GA` release is only going to set you up for unpleasant surprises. A `GA` is simply [a tag and nothing more](https://apereo.github.io/2017/03/08/the-myth-of-ga-rel/). Note that CAS releases are *strictly* time-based releases; they are not scheduled or based on specific benchmarks, statistics or completion of features. To gain confidence in a particular release, it is strongly recommended that you start early by experimenting with release candidates and/or follow-up snapshots.

In order to start experimenting with release candidates, at any given time, you should be able to append `-SNAPSHOT` to the CAS version in order to take advantage of snapshot builds as changes are made and published.

## Resources

- [Documentation](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/)
- [Release Schedule](https://github.com/apereo/cas/milestones)
- [Release Policy](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Release-Policy.html)

## Overlay

In the `gradle.properties` of [the overlay](https://github.com/apereo/cas-overlay-template), adjust the following setting:

```properties
cas.version=6.3.0-RC1
```

<div class="alert alert-info">
  <strong>System Requirements</strong><br/>There are no changes to the minimum system/platform requirements for this release.
</div>

## New & Noteworthy

### Spring Boot v2.3

CAS is now based on latest available version of Spring Boot, that is `2.3.0.RELEASE`. The CAS Overlay has also been updated to be in sync with this change. While this is classified as a Spring Boot feature release, the effects of the upgrade might be more apparent given the framework's significat usage in CAS. 

The following settings are affected by the upgrade and should be adjusted to match below:

```properties
server.tomcat.threads.min-spare=10
server.tomcat.threads.max=200

server.servlet.encoding.charset=UTF-8
server.servlet.encoding.enabled=true
server.servlet.encoding.force=true

management.endpoint.health.status.order=WARN,DOWN,OUT_OF_SERVICE,UNKNOWN,UP

server.tomcat.connection-timeout=PT20S
server.tomcat.max-http-form-post-size=2097152

server.tomcat.remoteip.port-header=X-Forwarded-Port
server.tomcat.remoteip.protocol-header=X-Forwarded-Proto
server.tomcat.remoteip.protocol-header-https-value=https
server.tomcat.remoteip.remote-ip-header=X-FORWARDED-FOR
```

There were no compatibility issues discovered during the upgrade and the configuration namespace remains largely unaffected for CAS. That said, please suspect and verify.

### Test Coverage via CodeCov

CAS test coverage across all modules in the codebase has now reached `80%` and continues to climb. Additional validation rules are also applied to fail all pull requests that fall below this threshold. This area will be closely monitored and improved 
as progress is made with the goal of hopefully reaching at least `85%` before the final GA release. Of course, this will not be a blocker for the final release.

### Redis Cluster Support

Redis support and configuration namespace are now capable of suppprting connections to redis clusters. 

## Other Stuff

- Attribute definitions mapped to an external Groovy script are corrected to handle caching in more resource-friendly ways.
- The management of service definitions is now delegating search operations to the service registry rather than filtering matches internally while also utilizing a caching layer to improve performance as much as possible.

## Library Upgrades

- ErrorProne Compiler
- Spring Boot
- Spring Cloud
- Spring Data
- Spring Boot Admin

## Credits

Big thanks to all who participate in the development of this release to submit patches and contribute improvements. Keep'em coming!

[Misagh Moayyed](https://fawnoos.com)
