---
layout:     post
title:      CAS 6.2.0 RC4 Feature Release
summary:    ...in which I present an overview of CAS 6.2.0 RC4 release.
tags:       [CAS, Releases]
---

<div class="alert alert-danger">
  <strong>WATCH OUT!</strong><br/>This post is not official yet and may be heavily edited as CAS development makes progress. <a href="https://apereo.github.io/feed.xml">Watch</a> for further updates.
</div>

<div class="alert alert-success">
  <strong>Collaborate</strong><br/>The blog is managed and hosted on GitHub. If you wish to update the contents of this post or if you have found an inaccuracy and wish to make corrections, we recommend that you please submit a pull request to <a href="https://github.com/apereo/apereo.github.io">this repository</a>.
</div>

The official CAS `6.1.0` GA was released in [October 2019](https://github.com/apereo/cas/releases). Since then, the project has been moving forward with the development of the next feature release that is tagged as `6.2.0`. Please review the [release policy](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Release-Policy.html) to learn more about the scope of the release. This post intends to highlight some of the improvements and enhancements packed into the **fourth** release candidate in the `6.2.0` series.

If you are looking for additional info on the previous release candidate, [please see this post](https://apereo.github.io/2020/03/03/620rc3-release/).

* A markdown unordered list which will be replaced with the ToC
{:toc}

## Apereo Membership

If you benefit from Apereo CAS as free and open-source software, we invite you to [join the Apereo Foundation](https://www.apereo.org/content/apereo-membership) and financially support the project at a capacity that best suits your deployment. Note that all development activity is performed *almost exclusively* on a voluntary basis with no expectations, commitments or strings attached. Having the financial means to better sustain engineering activities will allow the developer community to allocate *dedicated and committed* time for long-term support, maintenance and release planning, especially when it comes to addressing critical and security issues in a timely manner. Funding will ensure support for the software you rely on and you gain an advantage and say in the way Apereo, and the CAS project at that, runs and operates. If you consider your CAS deployment to be a critical part of the identity and access management ecosystem, this is a viable option to consider.

## Get Involved

- Start your CAS deployment today. Try out features and [share feedback](https://apereo.github.io/cas/Mailing-Lists.html).
- Better yet, [contribute patches](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Contributor-Guidelines.html).
- Suggest and apply documentation improvements.

### Shake Well Before Use

We strongly recommend that you take advantage of the release candidates as they come out. Waiting for a `GA` release is only going to set you up for unpleasant surprises. A `GA` is simply [a tag and nothing more](https://apereo.github.io/2017/03/08/the-myth-of-ga-rel/). Note that CAS releases are *strictly* time-based releases; they are not scheduled or based on specific benchmarks, statistics or completion of features. To gain confidence in a particular release, it is strongly recommended that you start early by experimenting with release candidates and/or follow-up snapshots.

In order to start experimenting with release candidates, at any given time, you should be able to append `-SNAPSHOT` to the CAS version in order to take advantage of snapshot builds as changes are made and published.

## Resources

- [Documentation](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/)
- [Release Schedule](https://github.com/apereo/cas/milestones)
- [Release Policy](https://apereo.github.io/cas/developer/Release-Policy.html)

## Overlay

In the `gradle.properties` of [the overlay](https://github.com/apereo/cas-overlay-template), adjust the following setting:

```properties
cas.version=6.2.0-RC4
```

<div class="alert alert-info">
  <strong>System Requirements</strong><br/>There are no changes to the minimum system/platform requirements for this release.
</div>

## New & Noteworthy

### WebAuthn Support

[WebAuthn Support](https://webauthn.io/) continues to progress at a slow and steady pace.  While the changes are still in 
progress and have not landed in the codebase yet, there is a fair amount of progress made to make WebAuthn available 
as another form of multifactor authentication in CAS. It is expected for this feature to finalize before the GA release. 

### JPA Implementations

The Hibernate framework has always been the default JPA implementation in CAS, and an assumed dependency for most JPA-related modules. 
In this release candidate, Hibernate support is extracted out into its own module, allowing alternative JPA implementations 
to be provided at runtime via `JpaBeanFactory` instances. As a result, support is now provided for both Hibernate and EclipseLink
while Hibernate continues to be the default.

### Deprecation of Script Engines

Support for Script Engines provided by the Java platform is deprecated and scheduled to be removed. Native support for Groovy,
independent of the JDK platform continues to be available and a viable choice for scripting options. Support for Ruby has also been removed,
while Javascript, Python and Groovy are still available though deprecated as part of the JDK's `ScriptEngine` capability.

### REST Service Registry Entity Mapping

When interacting with an external REST API, instances of `RegisteredServiceEntityMapper` can now be injected into the runtime
to translate CAS `RegisteredService` objects back and forth between CAS and APIs. The mapping should simplify the integration, allowing
CAS to handle POJO transforms rather than expecting external APIs to be aware of CAS data models and API changes, if any.

### Test Coverage via CodeCov

CAS test coverage across all modules in the codebase has now reached `70%` and continues to climb. Additional validation rules are also applied to fail
all pull requests that fall below this threshold. This area will be closely monitored and improved 
as progress is made with the goal of reaching at least `80%`
before the final GA release.

### Global Multifactor Provider Selection Menu

Multifactor provider selection menus can now be activated using global triggers in addition to 
activation options using the per-service approach. As an example, users may be allowed to choose
between Google Authenticator and CAS SimpleMFA for multifactor, regardless of 
affiliation, application, etc using `cas.authn.mfa.globalProviderId=mfa-simple,mfa-gauth`.

### Webflow Auto configuration

Auto configuration of webflow components that prepare the CAS runtime for multifactor authentication can now be further customized
by instances of `CasMultifactorWebflowCustomizer` by other participating or candidate modules to further augment the state of webflow. 

### Updated Integration Tests

The integration tests executed by the Travis CI environment are updated to run against the following components:

- MongoDb `4.2.x`
- Apache CouchDb `3.0.x`
- Couchbase `6.5.x`
- MariaDb `10.5.x`
- Postgres `12`
- Apache Cassandra `3.11.6`

### Principal Resolution via Person Directory 

Principal resolution handled by Person Directory is now able to pass along query attributes to the underlying attribute repository
that contain not only the query identifier as the username, but also principal attributes collected from authentication sources.
The collection of attributes can particularly be passed down to Groovy scripts that need to cascade execution of queries.

As part of this change, the aggregation of query results when multiple attribute repositories are in use can now also be cascaded
across repositories, in additional to the previous and still-default merging approach. Please note that in general, ldap search filters 
would be better off specifying the attribute name to use in the query (e.g. `{username}`) rather than `{0}` or `{user}`. This allows one to 
do complex multi-attribute queries as long as you don't use `{0}` and `{user}`.

Additionally, attribute repository sources that are bootstrapped and managed by Person Directory are now marked as `@Conditional`
only to picked up and created if the appropriate CAS configuration is defined (LDAP url, database connection strings, etc).

### Acceptable Usage Policy

[Acceptable usage policy support](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/webflow/Webflow-Customization-AUP.html) is given a face-lift
to be able to properly load policy terms and text from CAS language bundles, or via external sources such as Groovy or REST APIs. 

Additionally, policy sources and storage services are now marked as `@Conditional`
only to picked up and created if the appropriate CAS configuration 
is defined (LDAP url, database connection strings, etc).

<div class="alert alert-warning">
  <strong>WATCH OUT!</strong><br />This may be a breaking change specially if you were using Groovy to manage terms of use decisions. Consult 
  the CAS documentation and adjust your script accordingly to match the manual.
</div>

### Authentication Policy Per Service

The `required_handlers` field for service definition has been deprecated in favor of `authenticationPolicy`, to allow one to define richer 
configuration and metadata and instruct the CAS authentication engine more forcefully when it comes to processing application definitions.

As of this re-design, authentication policies [can be assigned to service definitions](https://apereo.github.io/cas/development/services/Configuring-Service-AuthN-Policy.html) to override the global defaults. 

<div class="alert alert-info">
  <strong>WATCH OUT!</strong><br />While the old field is not removed, and CAS should attempt to seamlessly transition old configuration
  into the new equivalent, it's best to take explicit action and migrate the setting now to the new syntax and format. The 
  <code>required_handlers</code>field will be removed at some point in a future CAS version.
</div>

### SAML2 AssertionConsumerService Handling

An important improvement to the handling of in SAML2 authentication requests to better align the CAS implementation 
with the SAML2 specification; if the `<AuthnRequest>` is not authenticated and/or integrity protected, 
the information in it MUST NOT be trusted except as advisory. Whether the request is signed 
or not, the identity provider MUST ensure that any `<AssertionConsumerServiceURL>` or `<AssertionConsumerServiceIndex>` 
elements in the request are verified as belonging to the service provider to whom the response will be sent. Failure to do 
so can result in a man-in-the-middle attack.

### JDK 14 Compatibility

Now part of [Oracle's Quality Outreach Program](https://wiki.openjdk.java.net/display/quality/Quality+Outreach), CAS is able to build and run successfully against the latest versions of JDK 14. The JDK baseline requirement
continues to be set at JDK 11, and we are simply keeping up with JDK releases to ensure CAS can correctly switch the baseline
requirement when deemed necessary.

### OpenID Connect Single Logout

Support for OpenID Connect Single Logout based for [back-channel](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-backchannel-1_0.html)
and [front-channel](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-frontchannel-1_0.html) are now made available. Back and front channel logouts 
are implemented with the use of the session id (which is the SHA of the ticket-granting ticket id).

## Other Stuff

- Support for `client_secret_basic` authentication is now available for OAuth/OpenID Connect refresh token requests.
- Handling of OpenID Connect's `max_age` request parameters is now corrected.
- Italian message bundles are now refreshed to match the latest expected language keys.
- CAS discovery profile is now set to correctly produce output in JSON format.
- Throttling authentication requests using Bucket4j is now corrected to consume buckets only once.

## Library Upgrades

- Spring Security
- Twilio
- Spring Boot
- Hazelcast Azure
- Pac4j
- Hibernate
- Person Directory
- Apache Tomcat
- Mockito
- Spring
- JUnit
- JavaParser
- Okio
- Swagger
- Oshi
- JUnit
- Micrometer
- Amazon SDK
- Nimbus
- Infinispan
- SQLServer Driver
- PostgreSQL Driver

## Credits

Big thanks to all who participate in the development of this release to submit patches and contribute improvements. Keep'em coming!

[Misagh Moayyed](https://fawnoos.com)
