---
layout:     post
title:      MyUW uPortal fork: the good parts
summary:    MyUW has customized uPortal locally in various ways. What's worth saying about this?
tags:       [uPortal]
---

# Summary

MyUW local uPortal is customized ("hacked" or "forked") from baseline uPortal 
("upstream") in various ways.

Modifications include

+ **Rendering pipeline branching** to direct some traffic out of the 
traditional rendering pipeline for handling via `uPortal-home`. The traditional 
rendering pipeline only renders maximized portlets.
+ New **uPortal theme and skins** that make uPortal look like `uPortal-home` 
when rendering a maximized portlet.
+ Additional JSON APIs and additional data in baseline uPortal JSON APIs
+ Layout management modifications to default adding a portlet to the first 
rather than last position in a container. (This makes the "Add to home" from 
`uPortal-home` a better experience.)
+ Removing features MyUW doesn't use. Most portlets. Related apps. Portlet 
events.
+ Local data.

These customizations are interesting because

+ They amount to hints about what another adopter might need to do to get 
`uPortal-home` locally working.
+ They're potentially valuable to port forward into upstream.


# Why is MyUW uPortal forked?

MyUW is running uPortal 4.2.1 with local customizations that both pre-date and post-date that release, the former achieved through heroic source control merging of a long history of local change.

This was closer to a typical historical uPortal adoption model, building the 
local portal from source. With ready access to that source, it's tempting to 
enhance it. With long release cycles and difficult upgrades, making 
enhancements directly in upstream often felt like duplicated effort, since to 
realize the improvement locally one also had to make it locally.

A more modern adoption model would obsessively make these improvements in 
upstream rather than locally and then locally adopt them by upgrading to open 
source product releases with the improvements.

# The modifications

## Hacked rendering pipeline

MyUW configures the uPortal rendering pipeline to direct to 
`uPortal-home` the requests that can be handled by `uPortal home`. The 
traditional rendering pipeline still renders portlets in maximized and 
exclusive window states.

+ Prefer to render static content via `/web/static/{fname}`
+ Prefer to render portlets via `/web/exclusive/{fname}` (`renderOnWeb`)
+ Bounce attempts to do anything other than render just one portlet (i.e. maximized or exclusive) to `/web`
+ Coerce guest user to the desired profile

# Hacked theme

MyUW uses a customized "Bucky" theme forked from Respondr. The purpose of this customized theme and associated skins is to make rendering a portlet maximized via uPortal look like rendering uPortal-home, so that users switch reasonably seamlessly between the two approaches depending on content.

+ Fewer regions. Simpler. Remove features MyUW isn't using.
+ When rendering a maximized portlet, simulate the way uPortal-home looks, so that rendering maximized portlets feels seamless enough. That is, stylize the header.
+ On add-to-home, clear uPortal-home-specific session storage items so that change will reflect when rendering `uPortal-home`


# Hacked JSON APIs

MyUW has modified JSON APIs to expose data `uPortal-home` needs.

+ Expose more data about portlet publications, to power widgets. e.g. `renderOnWeb`,``mdIcon`, `widgetURL`, `widgetType`, `widgetConfig`, `widgetTemplate`, `widgetExternalMessageUrl`, `widgetExternalMesageTextObjectLocation`, `widgetExternalMessageLearnMoreUrlLocation`, in `LayoutPortlet`. See also idea to use portlet publishing parameters for this instead.
+ Add `/marketplace/entry/{fname}.json` to get JSON for a single Marketplace entry
+ Add `/portlet/{fname}.json` to get JSON for a single portlet
+ Add `GroupRESTController`
+ Defaulting `url` of LayoutPortlet to that to render the portlet via uPortal
+ Add `lifecycleState` to `LayoutPortlet`
+ Add simplified move-portlet API call (`action=movePortletAjax` in `UpdatePreferencesServlet`)
+ Add remove-from-layout-by-fname (`action=removeByFName` in `UpdatePreferencesServlet`)
+ Add `firstName`, `lastName` in the `SessionRESTController` response. Also, `originalUsername`  when swapped.
+ Add some error handling in `LayoutPortlet` to catch when `widgetConfig` is not valid JSON.
+ Increase time-to-live of `marketplacePortletDefinitionCache`
+ Filter marketplace entries to only those in `PUBLISHED` publication lifecycle state. (Arguably this should be more nuanced, reflecting the viewing user's permissions -- maybe you've got permission to see entries that are in states other than `PUBLISHED`).
+ Attempts to make hitting JSON APIs have the side effect of logging the user in / bootstrapping a uPortal session when they can. This is fraught.

# Hacked DLM

MyUW has modified DLM to simplify the user experience of adding content to one's homepage.

+ Default adding a new item to the first rather than last position in a container.
+ Reset user layout on all profiles rather than on just the currently selected profile. (The feature but maybe not the configuration to use it is in upstream).
+ Various low value hacks.

# Hacked login process

MyUW has modified uPortal login to try to improve the experience for users who 
navigate directly to `uPortal-home` with only some or none of the uPortal 
session they need already established.

+ Added "silent login" feature to `LoginController` to enable `uPortal-home` 
bootstrapping a session via async HTTP request
+ Apply `requestAttribuetSourceFilter` to API requests as well as to `/Login`

# Removed features

MyUW has removed features that MyUW doesn't seem to need.

+ Removed "related apps". Big performance improvement.
+ Set `org.jasig.portal.portlets.marketplacePortlet.loadMarketplaceOnLogin=false
` . Stability improvement.
+ Removed `x:SearchRequest` and `x:SearchResponse` event handling in 
`SimpleContentPortlet` `portlet.xml`
+ Removed jGroups cache invalidation signaling and listening
+ In process of removing Categories, use just one giant category that conveys 
no permissions, assign all SUBSCRIBE and BROWSE permissions on a 
per-portlet-definition basis

# Other fixes

+ Fix deleting permission grants via permissions management Portlet

# uPortal abstraction API

A shared classloader approach to exposing Java APIs from portal to portlets.

(Don't worry about this: it's not relevant to any current work.)

# Data

+ Layout fragment defaulting and storing `uPortal-home` home page content.
+ Many local entity files
+ Additional metadata on many portlet-definition entity files configuring 
widgets.





# Misc

Disable jGroups cache invalidation.
Prompt the user to log out after resetting layout.

Fix non-initialized field in GroupsExceptionImpl.

# Microservices

+ Rest Proxy
+ Key-value store
+ LTI Redirector
+ Personalized Redirector
+ ...

# Custom Portlets

+ HRS
+ Web Conferencing
+ My Courses
+ Various academic-related portlets

This analysis looks back through 2015.

Some of these customizations may already be in upstream.
